# An Interactive Schwarzschild Black Hole Simulation

---

## Basic Usage

1. Go to the [release page](https://github.com/nyasyamorina/wormhole/releases) and download `schwarzschild-windows-x86_64-pack.tar.xz` (for Linux user, it is `schwarzschild-linux-x86_64-pack.tar.xz`).

2. Extract the archive to any folder and run `schwarzschild.exe` (for Linux user, it is `schwarzschild`).

    Linux user need to have glfw3 installed on system.

---

## System Requirements

- Compatibility with glfw 3.4 and Vulkan 1.3 (a computer with a graphics card driver updated after 2022).

---

## Controls

- Move the camera: Move the mouse.

- Move (accelerate): `WASD` forward, left, back, right; `ctrl` down; `space` up.

- Adjust the thrust: Mouse wheel.

- Exit: `q`.

---

## Numerical Values

When the program is opened in the command line terminal, a series of numerical values ÔÇőÔÇőwill be shown:

- `center object mass`: The mass of the black hole,

- `schwarzschild radius`: The Schwarzschild radius of the black hole (for ease of calculation, the Schwarzschild radius is taken as 1 light-second here),

- `your perspective`: The perspective of the "player", i.e., you,

- `distant perspective`: The perspective of a distant observer*, because external observers can never observe the inside of a black hole. After the "player" falls into the black hole, the relevant values ÔÇőÔÇőwill become nan,

- `time`: The time elapsed since the start of the simulation,

- `speed`: The "player's" speed,

- `movement thrust`: The thrust (acceleration) of the "player" during movement,

- `radial position`: The distance from the "player" to the singularity,

- `radial seed`: The relative motion of the "player" and the singularity; a positive value indicates the "player" is moving away from the singularity, and a negative value indicates the "player" is moving towards the singularity,

*: The values ÔÇőÔÇőfrom the perspective of a distant observer are simply a reinterpretation of the simulation results placed in the Schwarzschild coordinate. In other words, these values ÔÇőÔÇőare not what the "player" sees or what a distant observer sees, so there is no causal relationship between these values ÔÇőÔÇőand the "player".

---

## Visual Realism

### Celestial Sphere

- The celestial sphere is assumed to be static and infinitely far from the "player", meaning it remains unchanged regardless of the movement or time.

- The celestial sphere is generated by a custom (and poorly visual) algorithm. Stars flicker significantly during movement, and large areas remain dark even when moving near the speed of light.

    To calculate the Doppler effect of light, the celestial sphere needs to provide "full-frequency" spectral radiance, or, in this implementation, using brightness and color temperature to calculate blackbody radiation.

    Using real-world data for celestial sphere rendering is possible (see [my article](https://zhuanlan.zhihu.com/p/600600997)), but this would make the release binary enormous, the program complex, and raise copyright issues.

### Post-processing

None, except for tone-mapping, which leads to a very obvious "bug": no glare.

When moving near the speed of light, the light from the direction of travel becomes extremely flashy, realistically causing very strong glare and whitening everything in front. The lack of glare here results in a flat appearance when moving near the speed of light.

No post-processing also results in no "auto exposure", and I didn't add manual exposure either.

### Numerical Simulation

Both player motion and ray tracing utilize numerical solutions to differential equations, inevitably leading to numerical errors (from finite simulation and floating-point errors). Specifically:

- The motion simulation stops when the player at approximately 0.07 x Schwarzschild radius from the singularity, as getting closer causes the values ÔÇőÔÇőto diverge to nan.

- The motion simulation is unstable, especially with initializing state to circular orbit (see below), prolonged running will eventually result in the player falling into the black hole.

- When the player is too far from the black hole, the celestial sphere rendering will show discontinuities due to the dynamically selected ray step size.

- When the player is too close to the black hole singularity, blue bands may appear at the edges of the black region (the black hole's shadow). This is because when rays fail to escape the "strong gravitational region" due to finite simulation, these rays are rendered blue as a warning.

---

## Advanced Usage

The program itself (`schwarzschild.exe` or `schwarzschild`) is insufficient to run, external shader files are required, and user can provide custom shaders. Running the program in an empty folder with no arguments will generate the shaders used here.

### Parameters

- `-s="path/to/shaders"` or `--shader="path/to/shaders"`: Specifies the shader folder, defaulting to the current running path. The folder must contain the spirv shader files `init_ray.spv` and `render_ray.spv` (or the slang shader files, see below).

- `--slangc="path/to/slangc"`: Specifies the slang compiler path. If the shader folder does not contain spirv shader files but does contain the slang shader files `init_ray.slang` and `render_ray.slang`, the program will automatically call slangc to compile slang into spirv.

- `-f=<>` or `--fov=<>`: Specifies the field of view (vertical), in degrees. Default: 60.

- `-p=<>` or `--posotion=<>`: Specifies the initial distance from the black hole singularity. The validity of this value depends on `--init-state`. Unit: Schwarzschild radius. Default: 100.

- `-i=<>` or `--init-state=<>`: Specifies the initial motion state of the "player". Default: `at_rest`.

    - `at_rest`: Stationary. Initially, the "player" remains relatively stationary with respect to the black hole and gradually accelerates towards it. `--posotion` must be greater than 1.

    - `circular_orbit`: Circular orbit. The "player" will orbit the black hole in a stable circular orbit. `--position` must be greater than 1.5.

- `--simulation-speed=<>`: Controls the ratio of simulation time speed to real-world time speed. Default: 1.

- `--simulation-sub-steps=<>`: Controls the precision of motion simulation. Higher values ÔÇőÔÇőresult in higher precision but also higher CPU usage. Default: 100.

- `--n-iter-calls=<>`: Controls the number of times `iter_ray` is called per frame. Generally, this value doesn't need adjustment. Default: 1.

- `--iter-per-call=<>`: Controls the number of ray tracing calculations performed each time `iter_ray` is called. Higher values ÔÇőÔÇőresult in a smaller blue warning area but also higher GPU usage. Default: 500.

---

## Issue Feedback

Please open an issue in the repository.
